## Filling in Blanks

[Generative Image Inpainting with Submanifold Alignment](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.00211)

Authors:  Ang Li, Jianzhong Qi, Rui Zhang, Xingjun Ma, Kotagiri Ramamohanarao

The paper looks into how to fill in corrupted bits of an image with something that sort of looks real through use of a GAN.  I've done something like this but used a different technique.  Here the authors are trying to fill in only the spot.  They use a GAN to generate the missing part of the image, but then add on two additional regularization terms to better fit the missing piece.  These two extra terms are based on what they refer to as the local dimension of the data and information regarding the texture of the data patch.  

It's an interesting use of the term dimension here.  They use a volume calculation around a bunch of points generated by the GAN to get at the local dimension and then use that information to better pick the right output.  It's a very statistical definition of the manifold, though, and just focused on the patch as opposed to the full image.  In my work, I was looking at replacing the whole image with something that I had a physical understanding of the manifold dimension. In their examples, I would use my understanding on the range to the Eiffel Tower and it's orientation towards me to recreate a full image of the Eiffel tower eliminating the bad pixels.  You'd then have to look at the differences in that image and the real one to see if you were eliminating other important new features, which may or may not be hard.  

In any event, in both this work and the stuff I did, the corruption is a bit unrealistic.  It's rare (except in the case of occlusion) that you would see a large contiguous block of pixels being turned off.  In reality you would have some amorphous shape or general noise that you'd want to get rid of, like in flat fielding.  You're probably going to have to extend this method to get something that would apply to real sensors with real issues. 

[Some code here, but not of this specifically](http://www.ruizhang.info/code.htm)
