# Code for DC Data Portal Draft Outline
Doug Ratay
1/27/19

I'm collecting my thoughts here for what we could do for this project.  I don't have my heart set on anything here.  This document contains only observations about what I've seen in the past, and things that I think we could do all collected into something approaching a "plan".  I'm more than happy to reprioritize or include or exclude individual or groups of points.  My own experience is in developing software in the scientific and DoD world.  That background leads to a certain perspective that should be compared against others from the different worlds that Code for DC interacts with.  

## Introduction
The Data Portal project run by Code For DC has the potential to be a great service to DC residents.  Although the DC Government hosts its own data portal page, the Code for DC Data Portal is an independent service that can be responsive to DC residents in new ways.  This can include:

* Hosting data that is not directly generated by the DC government
     - Federal Government,
     - Local businesses, or by
     - Combining data sources that stretch across multiple local agencies (e.g. Metro, National Park Service, and neighboring districts)
* Serve as a resource for journalists.  
* An incubator for projects that get spun out to "full development" as a separate project under Code for DC.  
* Use the data as an education resource for teachers/students.
* Infrastructure development could serve as a training ground for Code for DC volunteers to gain experience with many facets of web platform development.

Currently, it appears that the Code for DC Data Portal does a good job on the first of these bullets.  The portal, hosted by Code for DC (I think) runs a data web platform (typically used by local government data offices) that allows users to search and move through trees to identify the data sets that are held.  There are web tools that allow a user to display data as tables or even as limited graphs for quick analysis prior to downloading a large file.  The web hosting platform is user content centered in that it appears that with login information, users can upload content or request new data sets.  It seems likely that in the case that a user knew about the Data Portal and found a data set that was relevant to their interests, they could perform useful analysis.

For the other cases above, however, the Data Portal appears to lack infrastructure or a connection to the people who might actually use it.  While there is a place for users to request new data sets, there is no process by which a user might see how this would be fulfilled.  Related to this, the Data Portal as an institution doesn't know exactly who might ask requests of it.  Would these requestors be general citizens, journalists, government employees, educators, or students?  Are there different mechanisms that these people might need to access data?  For the data that does exist on the platform, there are no mechanisms to show how the data might be used.  Other similar sites such as the DC Government Portal link to analyses that have recently been performed and highlight datasets that the owners of the site think are important.  This could have a dual effect of inspiring general users to find new ways of using the data that exists as well as serving as models to teach data science to members of the community.  

In the following sections, I lay out a rough task plan that I think could lead to increasing the relevance of the Data Portal to a number of communities within the region.

## The Task Plan

The plan is summarized in the bullets below.  This might better be described as a statement of objectives, because I haven't provided any detailed means by which to complete anything yet.

* Identifying Stakeholders
* Requirements Generation
* Data Policies and Procedures
* Analyses of Existing Data
* Highlighting Data Analysis
* Teaching Tools (Real and Virtual)
* Publicity

### Identifying Stakeholders

One of the ethics of Code for DC that I appreciate most is the idea to "code with people" as opposed to "for them".  In other words, in order to have a successful project, we need a partner who is supplying requirements and user feedback, as opposed to going off on our own and creating what we think is great.  Working with a user centered design attitude allows us to develop better working code and tools that will provide benefit to the people in our community who we are trying to serve.  The Data Portal, however, seems to have (for the recent past at least) existed outside of this user centered framework.  The Data Portal takes on more of a side project feeling in that it does not receive focus and is generally directed by the Brigade Captains.  This has led to inconsistent effort and a product that isn't really developed for anyone in particular.

The first step within this framework would therefore identify who exactly the Data Portal is trying to serve.  It could clearly have multiple masters, but some ideas might be:

* Journalists
* DC Government itself
* Citizen Groups
* Specific Non-Profits
* A Group of Educators or
* A Group of Students looking for example data sources

The final two could possibly exist within Code For DC itself if we wanted to establish some sort of data "cleaning/engineering/science" training program at hack nights (I'm neither for or against this).  At a higher level, this will likely fall out of finding stakeholders from the prior groups, as volunteers at the Hack Nights will be able to practice their skills on relevant data.

After choosing some base directions, contacting these people/groups would be the next step and beginning discussion which will shape the next larger task.

### Requirements Generation

The goal of this task would be to generate some realistic (understanding that we're all volunteers) requirement set that we can use to guide the development of the Data Portal.  These requirements may set out:

* Specific types of data that we should be setting out to find on Hack Nights (or in between),
* Front end development to the Data Portal that would allow for better use by the Stakeholders
* Infrastructure development to host more or different datasets
* Definitions of analysis or whitepapers on specific datasets
* Further groups of stakeholders to identify and bring in.
* And more...

This process should be very iterative (Agile as it were) so that work can begin on any of the subcomponents.  Further, it should be noted that Requirements development is a skill that is often sought out for more experienced coders so that we would be giving volunteers a chance to develop and point to examples of success in this avenue.

### Data Policies and Procedures

This task is related to the Requirements Generation task, but it is important to consider, so I separated it.  There are two important questions to answer under this task.  One, what are the community guidelines for acceptable data within the Data Portal Framework.  Two, who will be the responsible parties to maintain those community guidelines.

In the current state of the Data Portal, this task seems a bit overkill, but I think it is far better to be in front of these issues than behind it.  Clearly, I think the leadership of Code for DC would be against hosting data that reveals personal information directly.  As recent developments at Facebook and the like show, however, directly personal data is not absolutely necessary for organizations to develop detailed profiles of individuals.  Again, not that the Data Portal is wikileaks, but what if the original source of a data set being submitted to the platform is the result of "poison fruit".  How closely should Code for DC walk this line?  What will be the procedures be if some entity asks Code for DC to pull down a dataset for any number of reasons?  What are the limits on use for the data that is hosted at Code for DC?  

To answer these questions some sort of community discussion must occur between the leadership of Code for DC, the volunteers, and the stakeholders identified above.  This task represents that process.  As Code for DC is not a Silicon Valley startup under increasing pressure to drive revenue, we should take our time in developing what would amount to a second code of conduct for the organization.  

As with the previous task, this process of developing community standards and related policies is something that could be of great benefit to our volunteers, particularly those with an interest in policy or how Government relates to technology.

### Analysis of Existing Data

This task is something that can begin at some level right now, and has been the basic function of the Data Portal in the recent past.  While there is some basic graphing capabilities within the existing Data Portal framework, we should be able to have Code for DC volunteers take existing datasets and create documents or interactive web apps.  This would demonstrate the utility of the Portal and provide a nice outlet for volunteers to grow or demonstrate their skills.

Questions that must be addressed include:

* Where would these analyses be hosted/displayed, allowing for attribution to Code for DC.
* What are the most important datasets to be examined.
* Are there ways to facilitate the fusion of datasets within the existing Portal

### Highlighting Data analysis

Related to the previous task, what I have noticed on other governmental data sites is that they tend to highlight specific analyses or datasets with big links on the landing page.  My knowledge of front end tools and standards are ***nil***, but I think Lightbox is something that people talk about to show specific vignettes on a page.  *shrug_emoji*  Still, what this demonstrates, is that I think there is place for UI/UX or traditional web development (whatever the kids are calling it) within the Data Portal project.  This would have the benefit of drawing non- data scientists in to the project making it somewhat more robust and leading to possibly new ideas.  We should make an effort to encourage these traditional developers to engage with the requirements process to develop the best framework possible.

### Educators and Students

This task has significant relationship to the prior tasks, but it is worth separating out.  Depending on stakeholder interest we could focus attention on the ability of data science (and other) educators to find interesting data for their classes.  Similarly, we could focus effort within the web development task above to generate paths that make it very easy for learners to obtain data and begin working with it.  This might include full write-ups of analysis procedures within iPython or RMarkdown explaining how "professional" data scientists might approach a dataset.  We could also conduct informal discussion groups within the Hack Nights, similar to the CryptoParty, that teach attendees the basics of data analysis.

Going further afield, it might be reasonable for Code for DC to sponsor (or obtain other sponsorship) for data contests (I personally would rather see collaborations as opposed to contests, but I don't know what that looks like) or challenges open to various students or groups around the city.

### Publicity

One of the biggest challenges for the Data Portal is that no one really knows about it.  This task would be to develop plans for changing that.  This could include more prominent display on the Code for DC page, personal marketing at other DC events, or social media outlets.  Again, these marketing skills are likely to be ones that some attendees are interested in developing and projects like developing twitter bots to highlight recent analyses could be useful.

## Conclusion

This document was my stream of consciousness as I have been thinking about the Data Portal over the past couple of weeks.  Given my background, this seems to be an at least appropriate way to move forward that will involve more volunteers so that work is more widely distributed.  I am actively interested in other thoughts, and I am deeply in love with nothing above.  I look forward to your input.           
