# The Anxiety of the Precariate

Continuing on my reddit reading, I step into things that I'm much more into talking about than the details of data science.

[i_did_a_data_science_bootcamp_from_general](https://www.reddit.com/r/datascience/comments/ciaoj9/i_did_a_data_science_bootcamp_from_general/)
[industry_hopping_in_data_science](https://www.reddit.com/r/datascience/comments/cihbdm/industry_hopping_in_data_science/)
[besides_programming_knowledge_what_could_data](https://www.reddit.com/r/datascience/comments/cir7xt/besides_programming_knowledge_what_could_data/)
[prestigious_postdoc_vs_data_science_bootcamp](https://www.reddit.com/r/datascience/comments/cizx4a/prestigious_postdoc_vs_data_science_bootcamp/)

The Data Science subreddit is by far one of the most anxious places on the internet.  I feel really bad for people who are some 15 years younger than me and coming out into the world.  What are you supposed to do?  Despite our new economic paradise with full employment, and reports of data science jobs that will never be filled by the inadequate graduates of our secondary education systems, my impression is that things are pretty tough out there.  In the selected posts from the last day, we see a number of people who are ostensibly doing the right things, but really freaked out.  

Example 1 would be the person who is getting a phd in the very near future, who thinks that his best option for future employment is to go to a datascience bootcamp versus taking a real job.  Ok, I know they're considering a postdoc and there are a lot of things that the postdoc world is lacking (good pay or stability), but you know, you get paid.  Something that certainly doesn't happen while you're going to boot camp.  Perhaps this person expects to be working 90 hour weeks at his postdoc and will never be able to do anything else, but I would bet there would be a fair amount of time to take a week or two and do a boot camp.  Maybe you can finagle a way for someone to pay for it as well.  Further, who is this person's advisor, and why do they still have a job?  Clearly their advisor is connected enough to get this person the good postdoc that is being described in the post.  They've just decided to not do half of their job?  I certainly made a lot of mistakes in grad school and after, and I never asked my advisor for much, but really, this person needs some advising.  You have (are getting) a phd with some substantial skills.  You have interests and curisoity that are outside of what exactly you're working on.  Step into my office and we'll figure something out.

The first and second links are related in the sense that we aren't interested in teaching anyone in their jobs anymore.  When I was advocating hiring our recently brought on junior person straight out of college, the last thing I was interested in was how much code she had stored away in her head.  I could tell the first time I talked to her that she had a lot there and was able to communicate it.  I could tell from the projects she worked on that she could learn and work independently.  I said, and I continue to believe, that I can teach anyone how to code.  I want good people who are smart and motiviated.  And she's exceeded our expectations in every way.  My sense is that the people writing these posts are seeing that they're getting rejected by places that want specific, itemized skills, and are not interested in spending the time or money to teach anything.  That's their prerogative, I guess, but it will leave those companies behind and leave job seekers in a terrible place.

Leading to the last post of what should someone teach at bootcamp, and I my best advice is "how to be a professional and a good person".  I would want to teach the skills in interviewing that lead to people wanting to hire you regardless of how quickly you can write down quicksort.  The kind of broad based knowledge that allows you to have conversations with people in any number of fields.  Give them a list of books to read that are not in datascience, and tell them to figure out how to relate it.  Teach them something about empathy and how to use that to uncover customer requirements as opposed to just doing what you think you're supposed to.

But I've been saying that since I went to a liberal arts college before there was such as thing as datascience.
